Good morning.
My name is John Rosascco.
I'm a member of the
Apple OpenGL engineering team,
and I'm here to talk to you this morning
about the state of OpenGL on OS X.
In this session,
if you'll indulge me for a minute,
I'm going to cover what
OpenGL is in a slide or two.
And I know that's a little elementary
for most of the crowd here,
but I think it helps to kind of
ground us in a minute before we go
into the rest of the presentation.
I'll also talk about
OpenGL's role on OS X.
We'll go through some of the new
features and things that have
happened in the specification
and in Apple's implementation of
the specification since WWDC '05.
We'll talk about what's
new in OpenGL for Leopard.
We'll go through some
architecture slides,
some of which,
if you've attended previous WWDCs,
you may have seen before,
but we'll have some new stuff
in there for you as well.
We'll go through some of the new
extension examples and we'll kind of
roll that together with best practices
and basically how to make the best out
of modern OpenGL specification and the
features that have been enabled in OS X.
So what is OpenGL?
Fundamentally, it's a specification.
And that specification describes a
software interface to graphics hardware.
The OpenGL specification,
currently version 2.0,
has been developed by the
OpenGL Architecture Review Board,
otherwise known as the ARB.
[Transcript missing]
So what does OpenGL do?
Fundamentally, it takes a few inputs.
It applies,
and those inputs are pixels and vertices.
Then some visual operation
is applied to that data,
and it produces pixels or fragments out.
And really, if you take a look at it,
back at Apple,
we have the OpenGL machine printed
out on the wall by our group,
and it's about five feet
wide and four feet high.
This thing has, you know,
it's basically describing
a state machine,
which is kind of feathered in here,
that has an innumerable number of states,
it seems like, at times.
But it's often good to
just reflect back and say,
what is it that this thing is doing,
and where are we in those three states?
Are we here at the input stage,
where we're modifying this data?
Are we in a kind of transformation stage,
or are we in the output stage, you know,
kind of the rasterization
end of the pipeline?
So OpenGL's role on OS X,
I think it's pretty fair to say,
is very unique industry-wide.
And its uniqueness is really rooted
in the fact that there are application
dependencies and API and framework
dependencies because the Mac OS X user
experience is so intimately tied
with this kind of visual experience,
all the way back to the genie effects you
see when you close windows and all the
compositing and transparency that's been,
you know,
now most folks are familiar with
as far as OS X is concerned.
You know,
the heart of all that is OpenGL's
processing that visual information.
So, as far as OpenGL being
Grand Central Station,
I alluded to some application
dependencies earlier.
You know, one of the most fundamental
application dependencies is the
Quartz Windows Server itself and all
the windowing operations that are
basically controlling the desktop
and the OS X user experience.
The other application dependencies,
like iLife and iWork,
represent a very broad base of Apple's,
you know,
basically their customer or their
clientele that are using the platform.
So, obviously,
iLife and iWork is a big part
of the OS X user experience.
There's also the professional
applications like
Final Cut Pro and Logic and Shake,
you know,
for music and digital compositing.
And video editing.
Those all also depend
fundamentally on OpenGL as well.
And there are also the API dependencies,
some of them of which you may
have seen in this session,
such as Core Image or Core Video and
the new Core Animation.
These all depend on OpenGL as
well as Quartz Composer.
[Transcript missing]
So, new things since WWDC '05.
We've been very busy.
And one of the biggest
new things is OpenGL 2.0,
and I'll talk a little
bit more about that later.
GLSL.
As of the last WWDC '05,
we did have GLSL support,
but it was only in software.
Since that time,
we have given GLSL full hardware support.
The introduction of framebuffer
objects at that time in the
Mac OS X OpenGL implementation of OpenGL.
Also, pixel buffer objects.
For the first time,
stereo and window on the platform.
And processing,
we've added a feature for processing
unit determination based on the
enabled state for your application.
We also added an extension for our Vertex
and Fragment program that allows batching
of program parameters and a lot more
efficient kind of uses of the API so that
you're not just hammering on the API to
send these parameters into your shaders.
We've added an extension called
Apple Flush Buffer Range for
partial flushing of VBOs and
more efficient use of the bus.
We've added Intel GPU support,
so that's kind of a big departure,
or not big departure, but a big addition,
because adding a driver is kind
of a big deal on the platform.
Obviously,
not only is the GPU support there,
but the OpenGL implementation has
had to do a lot for CPU support
for the Intel platform as well.
There's a lot of optimized paths,
and when it comes to OpenGL development,
there's no room for messing around
or dropping megabytes per second on
the floor when you're trying to move
two or three gigabytes a second.
So obviously,
we've got to make the most advantage of
the CPU that we have at our disposal.
So for Leopard, what do we have new?
OpenGL 2.1 will be available in Leopard.
And GLSL version 1.20
of the language spec,
that GLSL 1.20 is available in the
developer seed that you've gotten,
or the Leopard preview DVD that
you've gotten here at the conference.
So that's ready to go.
You can find out a lot
more about the GLSL,
modern GLSL usage and examples
by attending Nick Burns' session,
number 216.
We'll also add support for
OpenGL ES 2.0 in Leopard timeframe.
64-bit support, a big one to make your
application 64-bit ready.
We have multi-threaded our GL engine
and our command stream for processing.
The pervasiveness of multi-core
systems was just too tempting
not to make that change,
that transition.
We'll have a new major version rev of
OpenGL Profiler available in Leopard.
And we're going to have some
to-be-announced shader tools.
So this is probably one of my
favorite things that's happened
since the last WWDC '05,
which is that our group has done
a lot of work on updating the
documentation so that you can get the
most out of your application on OS X.
This documentation is really superb.
They had a lot of engineering
support working with technical
publications on this.
Very well illustrated, great examples,
really great coverage and
continuity across the platform.
So I really encourage you
to take a look at this.
It was updated recently, June 28th.
So I hope you find it as interesting
and kind of compelling as I did
when I first took a look at it.
So, on to architecture.
As far as the architecture on OS X,
I alluded to some of the diagrams
you may have seen in previous years.
OS X has some really unique
challenges when it comes to
architecting an OpenGL implementation.
If you consider that you have a
system that is capable of driving
multiple displays using multiple
heterogeneous devices from various
different graphics vendors,
that means that this one device may
be driven by logic that was written
in part by Apple and part by NVIDIA.
This display over here is driven, again,
in part by Apple, but by ATI or Intel.
Then you take your application.
You have an extended desktop
across those two devices.
You move it from a GPU that
has capabilities of,
say, the ATI X1900 over to something
with the capabilities of one
of the older NVIDIA parts,
for instance.
You lose a tremendous amount
of functionality as far
as the GPU is concerned.
If there's a bunch of state
that's not supported in hardware,
obviously the implementation has to do
something smart with all that state.
It has to move it across.
Basically, seamlessly.
Make your application do what we call a
renderer switch when you move it across.
For these reasons,
it's kind of why the OS X combination
of OpenGL is quite unique.
We'll describe the framework
interface and the driver model.
So on the top of this diagram,
you see your application.
And on the left side,
you'll see the windowing
interfaces to OpenGL.
There are three of
those available on OS X.
One is Glut.
And you can see kind of the
dependency chain for Glut.
Glut depends on NSOpenGL view.
So essentially,
Glut is a kind of Cocoa-based,
results in having sort of
a Cocoa-based application.
Over to the right of that, you see AGL.
And AGL is for carbon-based
GL applications on OS X.
Underneath Glut is
NSOpenGL app kit slash Cocoa,
if you want to put
another slash on there.
And always remembering that, you know,
the app kit code and functionality
is not interchangeable with AGL.
So those are two paradigms you never mix.
And similarly,
because Glut is derived from NSOpenGL,
you do not mix that with AGL as well.
So underneath that, of course,
is driving through the state to
the OpenGL engine and drivers that
ultimately control the hardware.
So as far as the driver model,
we talked about the application
and the framework interface.
You may have heard in some of the
State of the Union sessions some of
the work about the OpenGL engine,
and this is effectively
another logical module.
One of the kind of configure application,
it's a modular implementation,
so you're really just trying to
wire together these different
elements in a manner that
makes the most sense logically.
Some of this wiring happens kind
of beneath the covers for you,
but ultimately you control this
by choosing pixel formats and some
of the state that you've set up
in your application and so forth.
So you have the GL engine
kind of command stream,
which then drives the commands
into the driver layer beneath it,
and we have our new Intel.
So you have the driver plug-in
there in blue on the right,
the previous three were at the last WWDC.
And ultimately,
once the driver state has been set,
that drives the commands
through to the hardware.
So that's it for architecture.
And after a little water,
we'll go into features.
So, new features for OpenGL and Mac OS X.
OpenGL 2.0.
Now...
If you consider,
most of you are probably quite aware
that when OpenGL makes a revision,
a minor revision number is
usually pretty significant.
In OpenGL's case,
a major revision number, therefore,
is even that much more so.
What makes OpenGL 2.0 much more
significant than the 1.x series is the
introduction of the GL shading language.
That, of course, is the descendant of the
arb-vertex-in-fragment program method.
[Transcript missing]
The Mac OS X is a new feature that allows
you to create your own custom Mac OS X.
[Transcript missing]